SSD (Solid State Disk) forensics, to be effective on existing and current technology, necessitate
hardware intervention.  For compatibility with older disk interface standards, SSDs employ a Flash
Translation Layer (FTL) to map Logical Block Addresses (LBA), used by operating systems to specify
locations in storage, to corresponding locations in flash memory chips.  The FTL handles all the
complexity of wear leveling and storage allocation across flash memory chips, which for reasons of
efficiency use a relatively large block size internally, have bits that can be set individually but
only erased an entire block---about a megabyte---at a time, and in the newer Multi-Level Cell (MLC)
chips, share transistors between blocks such that setting bits in one block causes predictable
corruption in an associated block, further complicating the FTL's bookkeeping.  The FTL presents a
simple LBA interface to the outside world, but runs a complicated shell game beneath the surface.
In contrast, the electrical interfaces to the flash memory chips of an SSD are straightforward and
clear.  Bypassing the FTL entirely, a forensic investigator with the right technical capability
talks to the flash memory chips directly, thereby gaining access to all storage for examination, not
just 'user-accessible' storage inside the device.  At present, this necessitates unsoldering the
flash memory chips and physical destruction of the SSD, although without loss of information.  The
required level of technical expertise extends only as far as unsoldering and resoldering
surface-mount packages to a test board, nowhere near the degree of difficulty involved in, for
example, decapsulating smart card chips with fuming nitric acid and probing them under a microscope.
Improved designs for sanization-friendly and forensic-friendly SSDs may incorporate such features as
tri-state buffers for in-circuit probing without the necessity of unsoldering chips, a verifiable
secure erase capability, Trusted Platform Module (TPM) for secure storage of cryptographic keys used
for Full Disk Encryption (FDE) with concommitant rapid cryptographic sanitization, and a discrete
for emergency sanitization.
